---
title: "Pintos"
date: 2026-06-16T17:00:00-07:00
---

{{< toc >}}

## Background

A few weeks ago, I saw [Rui Ueyama](https://github.com/rui314),
author of the [mold](https://github.com/rui314/mold) linker,
had published a repo for a university operating systems project called
[Pintos](https://github.com/ut-syspro-2026/pintos), along with a
[course description](https://github.com/ut-syspro-2026/pintos-gitbook).

Although I never took an operating systems class in college, the repos
above and related Stanford
[course](https://web.stanford.edu/~ouster/cgi-bin/cs140-spring20/pintosProjects.php)
[materials](https://web.stanford.edu/~ouster/cgi-bin/cs140-spring20/lectures.php)
bore a resemblance to what I remember hearing of my alma mater's OS
class in the
[early](https://web.archive.org/web/20020619090553/http://www.cs.brown.edu/courses/cs167/programs.html)
[aughts](https://web.archive.org/web/20040429071927/http://www.cs.brown.edu/courses/cs167/asgn.shtml).

Also, the Pintos source code could build and run on a personal macOS or
Linux system, with no dependencies on university-internal servers or
infrastructure. This apparently included the automated tests and even
the grading scripts! Given all of the above, plus copious free time, I
decided to give the Pintos projects a try.

## Experience

My implementation of projects 1 through 4:

1. [threads](https://gitlab.com/ewoo/pintos/-/commit/1ebd07aa)
2. [user programs](https://gitlab.com/ewoo/pintos/-/commit/e982e836)
3. [virtual memory](https://gitlab.com/ewoo/pintos/-/commit/d884fa96)
4. [file systems](https://gitlab.com/ewoo/pintos/-/commit/08cf4d14)

Also mirrored [here](https://github.com/etwoo/pintos).

I suspect I would have struggled with these projects during college;
alternatively, rising to meet these challenges would've meant
accelerated growth as a systems programmer.

One interesting wrinkle: reading software blogs and publications like
[LWN](https://lwn.net) over the years made some of the material
familiar. Applying concepts like preemptive scheduling (with interrupts)
and mapping between address spaces (with MMU/TLB help) after learning
them gradually over many years was likely much easier than putting those
ideas into practice immediately after learning them, as college students
must. I suspect this might be particularly so due to the lack of
conceptual purity in systems topics, such that even the most important
facts to keep in mind often feel quite disparate. From this perspective,
the core challenges of a project like Pintos arise from not entirely
intuitive, a posteriori facts about the world of computing, rather than
a unified, abstract theory.

Of course, therein likely lies the charm of an Operating Systems project
in C, in contrast to (for example) a Programming Languages project in
Scheme. Perhaps the unique fun of the former, not greater than yet
distinct from the latter, arises from the muck of realistic constraints
and confusions.

## Closing Thoughts

I enjoyed Pintos. The reading materials, projects, and source repo feel
well-designed and high-quality, down to the details of the test suites
and debugging workflows. I am grateful these educational materials are
available so that someone like me can learn from them outside of the
originating university setting.

## Appendix

### Project 1: Threads

Prior to project 1 (threads), I had never really thought about how a
thread is represented within an operating system. Maybe more
philosophically, I did not know what a thread "physically" "is";
instead, threads (or processes) existed to me as an abstraction around
what runs when and with what resources.

Based on project 1 and related course reading (sections
[A.1](https://web.stanford.edu/~ouster/cgi-bin/cs140-spring19/pintos/pintos_6.html#SEC91)
through
[A.5](https://web.stanford.edu/~ouster/cgi-bin/cs140-spring19/pintos/pintos_6.html#SEC111)),
my understanding is that a thread can be viewed at a slightly lower
level in the following ways:

A thread maps one-to-one with a
[page of memory](https://web.stanford.edu/~ouster/cgi-bin/cs140-spring19/pintos/pintos_6.html#SEC97).

Creating a new thread involves allocating a page of memory and writing a
series of initial values to that page (like we would initialize any
other struct). These initial values include a special series of stack
frames that can be imagined as what the CPU would have pushed onto the
stack (i.e. written to memory) if it had executed the initial CPU
scheduler routines and then yielded, only we synthesize these stack
frames directly instead of having the CPU create them as a side effect
of running `call` and `ret` instructions.

Each thread's page contains the kernel stack of that thread. This means
that while a thread is running, the stack register `%esp` of the CPU
will have a value that lies within the address range of that thread's
page (assuming a kernel stack size limit of 4 kB). In other words, we
can map from the currently running thread (abstractly) to its physical
location in memory by rounding the current value of `%esp` down to a
page boundary.

While a thread runs, the CPU instruction `call` pushes the value of the
instruction pointer `%eip` (and other information like function
arguments) onto the stack, and the instruction `ret` pops values off the
stack. Calling functions and returning from functions thus writes
values continuously to memory, and in this way, the CPU leaves
breadcrumbs in the current thread's page of the specific series of
function calls that have led to the current logical state. Conceptually,
there is an interleaving of computation and data; the data in memory
(pushed onto the stack) contain `%eip` values that tell us what
computations led to the present and what computations come next for a
given thread.

To switch from thread T1 to thread T2 means to save the current value of
`%esp` to a fixed offset within T1's page (treating the page like a
struct) and to load a similar value from T2's page into `%esp`.

To me, this feels a bit magical. How does thread T2 resume in the right
place, just based on having its stack pointer restored? Remember that
the CPU, while calling and returning from functions, has already been
writing stack frames to memory all the while, including right up until
the point that T2 last yielded. This means that restoring T2's stack
pointer brings into view all of these previously stored stack frames,
containing instruction pointers, function arguments, and similar.

One subtlety: as part of yielding the CPU, all kernel threads call into
a common entrypoint, called `switch_threads()` in Pintos. As a result,
all threads (except the currently running thread) have this same
function at the top of their callstack. When the previously running
thread calls into `switch_threads()` to yield the CPU, the newly running
thread returns from `switch_threads()` into the function that last
called it, when that thread most recently yielded.

In a sense, it is simple for T2 to resume in the right place because all
threads suspend in the same place, `switch_threads()`. The trick is that
every thread can have a unique set of values on the stack (in memory)
leading up to that `switch_threads()` invocation, reflecting that
thread's specific execution history in the form of instruction pointers,
function arguments, and similar, saved to memory by `call` and `ret`
instructions running in the context of that thread.

One neat side effect of each thread "being" a page of memory is that we
can see each kernel thread's present callstack by inspecting its
corresponding page. The Pintos gdb scripts in `./src/misc/gdb-macros`
contain an implementation of this concept, called `btthread` and
`btthreadall`, corresponding to the `bt` and `bt thread apply all`
commands of gdb.

Overall, I would say that project 1, more so the reading material and
existing Pintos implementation (and less what I added to Pintos as part
of the first project), taught me that threads can be viewed as "just"
data in-memory that gets updated automatically (so to speak) by CPU
instructions like `call` and `ret`, the content of which influences
subsequent control flow when loaded back into certain registers (e.g.
control flow via `%eip`, page table mappings via `%cr3`).

Pretty trippy!

### Projects 2-4

Strangely, although project 1 took the least amount of time, it
contained the most profound-feeling information. Projects 2 through 4
felt more practical in nature.

Another potentially idiosyncratic experience: I felt project 3 (virtual
memory) raised more conceptual gotchas than project 4 (file systems),
even though I assume most students find the former less demanding than
the latter.

For example, it felt strange to me dealing with the consequences of a
contiguous user-space address range, like a user-space buffer pointed-to
by an argument to the `read()` syscall, not necessarily mapping to a
contiguous set of pages in kernel space. Maybe this is obvious given the
existence of page tables and MMU/TLB mappings, but it still felt weird
to handle syscalls like `read()` with code that ended up looking a bit
like scatter-gather logic in kernel-space.

In contrast, the most time-consuming parts of project 4 centered less
on anything OS-specific and more on concurrency in general, like how to
drain outstanding reads on a buffer in the cache before reusing it to
serve a different on-disk sector, or how to dispatch block I/O in
response to a cache miss for one thread while still responding to
in-memory cache hits for other threads. This general class of problem
could seemingly apply to project 3 equally, if one took a sophisticated
approach to the page cache, like sharing frames when multiple threads
`mmap()` the same file or integrating the page cache tightly with the
buffer cache (both of which I personally eschewed).

Maybe real-world software work leads to more day-to-day familiarization
with file system complexities, compared to virtual memory (as distinct
from memory usage and memory access patterns in general). I can recall
learning about what `fsck` puts in `lost+found` after an unclean
shutdown, why frequent `fsync()` usage stressed earlier file systems on
spinning rust drives [so](https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+bug/215728)
[much](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=421482), how to use
`strace` to investigate slow I/O, and so on. This might all have had the
cumulative effect of making project 4 seem more straightforward than it
would have without the intervening years of experience.

I did also have the benefit of learning about the
[WAFL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Write_Anywhere_File_Layout)
file system at NetApp. Although I never developed a deep understanding,
I did at least encounter how inodes and directories can be represented
on-disk, how a file system and a block layer can coordinate, and other
higher-level concepts. From an outside view, this seems like it would
make a university file systems project easier, but given how superficial
my knowledge of WAFL and the
[ONTAP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ONTAP)
operating system seemed at the time, I'm not so sure. Also, projects 3
and 4 still took me roughly similar amounts of time to complete; I just
spent more time in project 4 on synchronization issues that could affect
any concurrent software system, rather than addressing bugs that arose
more clearly from an incomplete understanding of VM-specific or
filesystem-specific concepts.
